FEEL FREE TO PLACE COMMENTS IN THIS DOCUMENT USING GooDoc’s COMMENTS FEATURE


Note: you might first want to open these using a laptop… but note that the codepen links below work just as well on phones:
* iPhone: Open them in the iPhone’s “safari” browser.  The speed of the animations is perfectly adequate in most cases.  
* Android: I have not tried android -- let me know how it goes!




Sample CSS animations that might provide some fodder for the tech:


* Bubbles: https://codepen.io/bh/pen/JBlCc
* Spray of particles: https://codepen.io/jsoverson/pen/chGDt
* Interactive particle systems: https://codepen.io/rikschennink/pen/gaQxPY








Effects that we might want to consider:
* Glowing: http://codepen.io/pavlovsk/pen/ORyqJj
* I like the look of the circles in this 2-and-a-half dimensional particle system -- they look like : https://codepen.io/noahblon/pen/wEfCz
* “Trails” left behind by moving particles:  https://codepen.io/akm2/pen/rHIsa 
* Hyperspace -- totally inappropriate but I love the effect and maybe could be part of an “intro” sequence?  https://codepen.io/noahblon/pen/GKflw






Tech to be considered for the long term:
* Higher performance via WebGL will allow much more speedy and complex animations, but there’s a learning curve here for most engineers: https://codepen.io/soulwire/pen/JBhxs






0
Cosmic Egg?
Prevailing theory suggests that all energy in our known Universe was condensed into a tiny area, possibly smaller than a single atom. It was hot, dense, a singularity. No one knows what surrounded it or came before it. Theories include Infinite Everything; Nothing. 

An alternate theory imagines a Multiverse, millions of Universes-- fabrics or membranes-- vibrating in close proximity. As the membranes of two universes collided, our Universe, was born. It is possible that there was no beginning.


10-36 of a second
Expansion Burst
Evidence points to an explosive expansion that grew the Universe grew to the size of a grapefruit. 

The Force of Gravity, the attraction of matter to matter, emerged. A Force is a way that particles interact with one another; attraction, repulsion, influencing behavior or movement. Energy could thus transform into the most basic forms of matter and anti-matter: quarks and leptons. No one entirely knows what basic particles look like. We infer based on how the particles they make up behave.


10–6 of a second
Infant Matter
The 4 Forces of the Universe came into being. The Strong Force, which operates across tiny distances and holds nuclei together, emerged, growing the number of particles in the Universe. The Electromagnetic force: mediating electrical and magnetic behavior and light; the Weak Force: causing radioactive decay, the result of protons turning into neutrons (or the opposite).

Infant Light was born.

1 second 
Marriages of Matter
The Universe cooled to about a trillion degrees, allowing quarks to combine to form hadrons-- protons and neutrons. More complex child particles formed. Hydrogen, in its ionized or electrically charged state, is simply a single  positively charged proton.


20 minutes 
Merging Matter
Protons and neutrons merged through fusion, creating the atomic nuclei for more complex elements. Helium and lithium, the lightest, simplest elements, appeared. Neutral Hydrogen formed attracting electrons to their positive proton nucleus.

Fusion, which releases energy as a byproduct, is only possible when particles collide. But all atomic nuclei have positive charges and thus repel one another. The lighter the particle, the more likely it can reach the necessary speed to collide with enough force.

Fusion powers stars. The energy released is light, heat.   

300,000
Unfolding
The temperature dropped to 3000 degrees. Hydrogen and helium ruled the stretching space of a growing Universe.

200 million years
Quiet Expanse
Time passed in a quiet, expanding Universe. Imagine the Universe as a fabric, stretching, potentially forever. The matter spread throughout, however wants to pull together. In this early period, the stretching of the Universe spread particles so far apart that they were diffusely scattered across space, interspersed by a thin layer of energy that was not dense enough to form matter.

1 billion years
Simmering
What we know: Radiation, photons travelling by particle or wave from a source, increased across the Universe. The waves or particles travelled so fast that they knocked electrons off of hydrogen; the amount of positively charged (ionized) hydrogen outnumbered the amount of neutral hydrogen.

The causes of this radiation increase are theory. But most begin with Gravity. As matter formed, areas of the Universe became more dense, attracting matter to matter, eventually leading to areas so dense that they collapsed inward. Gravitational collapse results in different things. If the particles being condensed are small enough, nuclear fusion can kick in-- the merging of particles under extreme force. This releases explosive energy, radiation, that fights against the implosive density of matter. 



This is how solar nebula are born, eventually growing into stars, suns. When the material is too heavy to undergo fusion, all that’s left is dense, imploding matter. A black hole.

Quasars, old forms in our Universe, are particle clusters revolving around super massive black holes. Up to the point of a massive black hole’s event horizon, particles are moving fast, breaking up and colliding to releasing huge amounts radiation.  

8 billion years
Galaxies
Stars of all kinds formed, blooming across the Universe. They were born, lived, and died, resulting in Supernovas that recycled stardust into more stars as matter clustered. 

Black holes formed, around which galaxies formed.

Star were born that later become a part of the Milky Way Galaxy,  home to Earth.

9 billion years
Sun
Our Sun, a young star, was made from the remnants of many other stars that were born and died. It was born from from the gravitational collapse of a dense cloud of matter, 

9.2 billion years
Earth 
No one knows exactly how our solar system formed in the way it did, why the perfect conditions for our beautiful blue globe were possible in our neighborhood of the Universe. But when stars are born, they release a spinning disk of gas. This disk can either continuing falling onto the surface of the star or give birth to planets, moons, and asteroids. The beginnings of Earth, along with the moons and other planets in our solar systerm, were  collections of this matter. As they grew in different ways, the planets slowly moved into the stable orbits we have today.

10 billion years
Tumult
Archaeology suggests that Earth was bombarded by small chunks of matter--asteroids and comets-- in its early days, known as the Pre-Cambrian period. During this violent time, the Earth was incredibly hot, with no oxygen and a poisonous atmosphere made of helium and hydrogen. Eventually, after thousands of years of bombardment ended, the surface began to cool, free oxygen formed, clouds formed, and massive rains fell, to create our oceans. 

11.3 billions years 
Life
Toward the end of the Pre-Cambrian period, signs of life emerged. As far as we know, the first known life was cyanobacteria, now fossilized in ancient glaciers. 

How can life form form non-life? Scientists who study Abiogenesis, life arising from non-living matter, seek methods of self-replication. They look at the conditions of early Earth and try to replicate genesis using its ingredients. Most believe that RNA, which stores genetic information and triggers the creation of proteins, came first, evolving later into the incredible data storage device, DNA, that we have today.

These theories are predicated on the idea that the conditions of Earth gave rise to life. But there are alternatives. Could life have existed in asteroids and other small chunks of matter, crashing into Earth during the early Pre-Cambrian Era?

13.6 billion years
Death
In the Paleozoic Era, life exploded, after the amount of oxygen in the environment grew. In a mere 250 million years, billions of life forms, including plants and fish. At the end of this period was the largest mass extinction event on record, killing almost all marine life and around 70% of land-based life. The reasons for this mass extinction aren’t entirely known but are believed to be a combination of volcanic activity, temperature changes, and impact from space.

13.75 billion years
Dawn
It took time for life to resurge after the extinction event. But during the Mesozoic era was the dawn of dinosaurs and early mammals. At the end of this period, another extinction event occurred. Most scientists believe it was a catastrophic, massive impact from space that again destroyed much of life on Earth. 

13.8 billion years
Present
Earth’s last major extinction event paved the way for mammals to diversify and flourish in our Cenozoic Era. It was only a mere 2.8 million years ago that our first recognizable ancestors, Homo Habilis, evolved. A millions years after that, the brain and neural connections grew, finally evolving into Homo Sapiens 200,000 years ago. 

15 billion
Re-Death
At some point in Earth’s future, another mass extinction event will occur, marking the end of the Cenozoic Era. Whether because of an asteroid’s impact or other factors, the Earth will change. We also know that our Sun grows warmer and brighter by about 10% every 1 billion years. Eventually, our Home will become hotter. The oceans will evaporate, while Mars will reach temperatures similar to an Earthly ice age.

19.5 billion
Fade
Our sun will turn into a red giant, a star in the final stages of its life. Red giants are cooling stars, which often grow bigger before their die. The outer layers of the Sun will shed in solar winds, releasing a cloud of ionized gas, called a planetary nebula. As the sun grows to more than 200 times its current size, Mars, Venus, and Earth will likely fall into its mass.

20 billion years
Cold Sun
Stars die in many ways, mostly depending on how big they are. As our small Sun dies, it will become a White Dwarf, dense matter that will radiate heat and for a long time, even though fusion is no longer occuring. Suns that are bigger than ours can become Neutron Stars, extremely dense, spinning mass that can release pulses of light. Even more massive stars may become black holes. 

100 billion years
Blending
While our small galaxy goes through its life cycles, the fabric of Universe will continue to expand. If the rate of expansion does not result in matter tearing apart before this time, then matter will continue to combine into dense areas of space, even as the Universe stretches. As matter attracts matter, galaxies will begin to merge. At the center of a galaxy is almost always a black hole. 

100 trillion years
Branches
If matter continues to combine, eventually, it will all collapse into stars and stars will have gone through their life cycle. After we run out of small particles, stars will stop forming. They will exhaust and all die. The Universe will be filled with dying and dead stars. Black holes will grow larger and larger, and more black holes will form at a growing rate. On the other hand, if the rate of expansion and contraction stay in a fine balance, then the Universe might go on creating and destroying indefinitely.  


10 60 years
If matter continues to merge, then black holes will dominate the Universe. 


10200 years
Decay 
If the theories are true, even black holes die, with their particles instantaneously evaporating into subatomic particles. Protons and other particles will decay, based on the principles of the weak force, into their subcomponents.


101060 years
The Future
The further away in time, the harder it is to use what we know of the past to predict the future. Yet most theories relate in some way to the rate of Universal expansion in comparison to the attraction and contraction of matter and whether the Universe is spinning. For example, one theory hypothesizes that rate of the Universe’s expansion would tear matter apart to such an extent that it could not come together to form matter. In that scenario, in less 30 billion years, matter will cease to exist and only pure energy will remain.

In the dark era, matter will have disintegrated into pure Energy. Other theories say the matter will outpace the stretching of Universe, resulting in a super-massive black hole that will force the Universe to contract, into an infinitely dense matter that starts the process all over again.


*